The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this program is Robert Heinlein. Robert Heinlein, to many
readers, is science fiction. His first story, Lifeline, was published in 1939 by
John W. Campbell. It was followed by several short stories, many reflecting
Heinlein's themes of longevity, revolution, and mysticism. In 1947, he started a
series of juvenile novels, which have greatly shaped the way people perceive
science fiction today. The turning point for Heinlein's work was the publication
of Starship Troopers in 1959. This was followed by possibly the first science
fiction bestseller, Stranger in a Strange Land. Heinlein's work became
increasingly mystical and dominated by his own moral and ethical views. His
early work, I think, is probably what most people today remember him for. As you
said, his first story was published in 1939. And that story and the ones that
followed it were really based on the old pulp formulas in a lot of ways. They
were gimmick stories, some of them. They were adventure stories, exploration
stories. They were all fast-moving. They were entertaining. They were clever.
Lifeline, for instance, has as its gimmick a machine that predicts... Not
predicts, I'm sorry. It actually states the moment of a person's death. And a
certain Dr. Pinero demonstrates the validity or the efficacy of this machine and
predicts people's death. Of course, the insurance companies don't like this too
well, so they initiate certain plots to get rid of him. And near the end of the
story, he's assassinated. In addition to being a gimmick story, it's also got a
clever ending. Pinero, it seems, had scanned his own lifeline with this machine
and had foreseen his own death by the insurance company plot. But, of course,
wasn't able to do anything about it because the machine always told the truth.
In the story, Roads Must Roll, Heinlein extrapolated a future transport system
that was rather unique. It was a series of conveyor belts, if you will, that
were placed side by side, each one being a faster speed than the next one. A
person could step onto a very slow-moving five-mile-an-hour belt and progress
his way inward until he was traveling at quite a high speed. These things were
huge. They stretched all over the country and, I suppose, the world with people
building buildings, businesses on the inner strips that would just move all the
time. Roads Must Roll was written in 1940, and Heinlein was inaccurate in
predicting that private cars would go out of use in the highways. But he was
rather accurate in predicting that transportation would be fairly well watched
over by large and powerful monopolies, which they are now. The crux of the book,
or the story, is that it's a conflict between the union or the workers and
management and what types of services the roads will have and inadequacies and
pay and other things along that same line. Another one of his early stories, and
considered a classic for its theme, is By His Bootstraps, published in 1941. And
this is a time travel story. Heinlein has covered time travel at various times
in his career. This, I believe, was his first, and some people consider a
classic of the form. But it's a brain-twisting story. Of course, when you talk
about time travel, you're dealing with all sorts of paradoxes. And what Heinlein
does in this story is to construct a plot whereby the main character plays all
the roles. He's a young man. He goes back in time. He meets himself as an old
man. He's obviously gone back in time before. Everybody he meets in the past is
one aspect of himself when he had been in the past at previous times. It's very
hard to follow because of the convoluted plot structure, the traveling through
this time gate that allows him to emerge at various points in time. But it's
still considered, as I said, a classic by some people. And Heinlein has used
what has been termed cyclic time travel before, or at least he has used it since
in other stories. This story, along with some of his other earlier ones, are
based on a gimmick of some kind. Another one along these same lines, using an
idea or a gimmick in it, is, And he built a crooked house. It's a very unusual
and humorous short story concerning a fellow who builds a house in the form of
an unfolded tesseract, or hypercube, a four-dimensional cube. This is a house
that looks like four cubes stacked on top of each other with a cross cube on the
second level up from the top. And he builds this thing in California. And there
happens to be an earthquake one night, and the whole thing folds up. And now he
has a four-dimensional house. When they enter it to find out what happened to
the rest of the house, they aren't sure. They think maybe someone came and took
it away or something. They don't find any debris around it, however. But they go
inside and look around and go up to where they think the roof is going to be,
and it's another room. And they keep going up and up and up. And when they get
to the top room and go up on what was the roof, they're back in the bottom room
again. As they open windows and doors, they find all sorts of interconnections
that are not proper in the three-dimensional universe in which we live.
Eventually, they open windows. One of them looks straight down the side of the
Empire State Building as they're looking out, which is rather disconcerting. And
another one looks upon a seascape, but it's upside down. Eventually, they leave
the house through one of the windows, thinking that they're on an alien planet.
And actually, they're just out into the Joshua Tree National Monument somewhere
in the middle of California. Yeah, all of these early stories dealt with some
kind of clever twist or gimmick, something of that nature. And they were very
popular with the readers of Astounding, John W. Campbell's magazine. But
Campbell, the editor of that publication, in 1941 noted that many of Heinlein's
stories followed a consistent future. In other words, they would have certain
developments, certain people even, that could be found in more than one story.
And he wrote a little article about that, calling the reader's attention to the
fact that this author seemed to be writing what has come to be called a future
history. And since then, Heinlein has added many stories, many novels to his
future history. And I think that, along with people like Paul Anderson and Larry
Niven, other authors who have done the same kind of thing, that this is a, I
guess it's almost a rarity in science fiction, where an author will build almost
an entire future and follow it through a number of stories and novels. Lifeline
and Rolls Must Roll, two stories which we've already talked about, are two of
the stories in Heinlein's future history series. One of the ones following that
was blow-ups happen, which accurately predicts some of the problems we're having
now with nuclear waste and possibility of meltdown and detonation of nuclear
power plants. And all those stories dealt with things on this earth. They
started his future history and they dealt with earthly matters. But very soon he
went out into exploration. And his first stories in that area were the
exploration of the moon. And one of his novels, The Man Who Sold the Moon,
published in 1950, developed the theme of the exploration of the moon by private
industry. Now Heinlein sometimes can hit the future pretty carefully when he
extrapolates, or pretty closely when he extrapolates. This time he seemed to be
a little off in thinking that the moon would be explored, developed, exploited
by industry or private business. But anyhow, the protagonist of that novel is a
man named D.D. Harriman. And he's obsessed with exploring the moon and going to
it, in fact, also. But he happens to be very rich. He uses all of his great
resources to hire pilots, to build spaceships, to conduct the research and
discover the technology necessary to get to the moon. And he's also a salesman,
as the title indicates, The Man Who Sold the Moon. He conducts a great
advertising campaign. Heinlein is noted for his detailed pictures of the future.
And as Harriman tries to sell the moon to the public, you see all sorts of
examples of why Heinlein is considered to be a finely detailed writer. For
example, he sells the idea of advertising on the moon to a soft drink company.
He convinces them that they can project a beam on the moon which will reproduce
the logo of their particular soft drink as a means of advertisement and thereby
gain money for his project. But Harriman is successful. He does get people to
the moon. He does start to exploit it. And he has totally succeeded with what he
set out to do. But earlier than this, Heinlein had written a story called
Requiem, which is actually a sequel to this story, but was written first. In
Requiem, Harriman is able to outwit his heirs and eventually gets to the moon.
Although at the cost of his own life, the story is considered one of Heinlein's
more powerful short stories in that it has a sort of wish fulfillment that
almost any science fiction reader can identify with. Yeah, there's a
sentimentality to that story which is not always found in Heinlein. Usually he's
noted as a great realist. But here he has this old man who is almost ready for
death. He knows he's going to die if he makes a trip to the moon. But yet he
accepts it simply because he's always wanted to do that. It's not totally
sentimental because he got what he wanted, he knew what was going to happen, and
there are no tears shed at the end of it. But still, it's a note of almost
melodrama that's not usual in Heinlein's work. But very soon he started to
expand his future history into the solar system, the other planets, the asteroid
belt, and so forth. And I think probably the collection of short stories known
as Green Hills of Earth would contain most of that material. The stories in that
particular book deal with all sorts of themes, all sorts of aspects of human
nature as mankind expands throughout the solar system. For instance, Delilah and
the Space Rigger is one of the first women's lib science fiction stories. And
it's something which could have been written today. It's simply a story of the
first woman who went out to work on a space station. She's at first not accepted
by the men simply because she's a woman and space is a man's world. But because
of her courage, because of her ability, she comes to be accepted and simply
becomes a space woman. The Green Hills of Earth, the title story of that volume,
involves a blind bard of the space waves named Rizling. He's gone through the
solar system many times. He's blind because of radiation. But he's a singer, a
bard. He makes up poems and songs and entertains the crews and they give him
free rides. He loses his life as he saves the crew of one spaceship. And as he
dies, you know, locked in a room which contains radiation, he composes his last
song, a beautiful ballad about the green hills of Earth. One other story,
Misfit, just to mention it briefly, introduces a character which later he picks
up in Methuselah's Children, a man named Andrew Jackson Libby. He's almost a
human calculator and has a few adventures and saves his fellow crew members and
spacemen because of his amazing mental abilities.
In 1941, he wrote a story known as Methuselah's Children, in which we meet the
character Lazarus Long for the first time. According to the story, in 1974, an
organization was formed to see if they could increase longevity in humans by
genetic means. And this was done to a certain family of people. These people
were able to live about three times longer than normal, I believe. And they had
to maintain secrecy of this fact from the general public for fear that the
public would not understand what they had done, would think that there was some
kind of a special drug or device that would allow them to become long-lived
themselves. So this family kept this a secret until it eventually got out. When
it did become known, and of course they were in danger of their lives from the
normal populace, they commandeered a spaceship and took off for deep space. They
eventually came across a planet where they were going to try to settle, but
there was an alien race that they contacted there that was so alien and so
strange that they just simply couldn't handle it. They had to leave. They went
to one other place, I believe, and then finally came back to Earth to try to
reconcile themselves with the human populace because they just couldn't hack
being out in space as refugees forever. When they came back, here's the twist
that is common to many of Heinlein's stories, the human race that they left
behind had found some sort of a way to become long-lived themselves. And so that
the whole escapade became academic. There were a couple things about that story
that were interesting, in addition to what you said. The spaceship, the
interstellar craft that they commandeered to escape Earth, I believe that was
the first time Heinlein had taken any of his characters outside the solar
system, where they'd achieved interstellar flight. Even though they did come
back home, it wasn't a successful journey in the sense they stayed out there and
colonized. Also there's alien contact, of course, with the alien races. In
Lazarus Long, I suppose, along with the Michael Valentine Smith in Stranger in a
Strange Land, he would be the most recognizable of Heinlein's main characters.
There have been books published about Lazarus Long's sayings, his wisdom. Of
course, he lived such a tremendous span of years that he would gain all sorts of
wisdom and all kinds of little sayings and aphorisms were associated with him.
But he was the head of this family, the Howard family, I believe it was called,
that originally were the ones that had longevity. And he does turn up later in
Heinlein's future history.
Probably the end chronologically, not so much the end as being the last book he
wrote about it, but the end chronologically of his future history would occur in
two short stories, both published in 1941, one entitled Universe and one
entitled Common Sense, later published as Orphans of the Sky, a novel. In
Universe, we're shown a ship that is a slow boat or a generation ship taking a
crew of humans to a far distant star so that they can begin life again. And this
is a ship that moves so slow that the first people who boarded the ship would
not live to see the end of the voyage. Their descendants would be the ones who
would eventually reach the planet that they're aiming for. This has been in
transit so long, and things have happened over the years to the ship that the
people on board have forgotten that it's even a ship. They live in the interior,
and for all that they know, that is the entire field of existence. The entire
universe is that interior where they live and have their farms and houses and
cities. The exterior portions of the ship are controlled by mutants who prevent
the normal humans from reaching the exterior portions of the ship and thereby
seeing the stars and exterior universe. Yeah, there's a great deal of animosity
between the mutants and the regular humans. In fact, what they really have to do
is combine forces before they can ever realize that this is a ship going
somewhere and try to do something about it. But the protagonist, the main
character in that story is a strange creature. He's one of the mutants. He has
two heads. And he happens to convince one of the normal humans what he's found
out. He has found out, this two-headed mutant, has found out that this is a ship
they're on. And he convinces one of the normal humans. And the story is
optimistic. Even though these people have lost sight of who they are and where
they're going, as the title indicates, they think their little ship is the
universe, the story ends with the words, the two-headed mutant says to his
friend, we've got to do it, you know. Meaning, tell the other humans they have
to stop the ship, they have to get, well, first of all, get where they're going
and then stop the ship. In the second part, common sense, this is what they do.
They do convince the humans that they are on a ship, but complications ensue.
Politics comes into it. Power factions, petty jealousies, a lack of organization
occur. And by the end of the story, common sense, only a few of the people on
that ship do escape to the planet the ship had been aimed at generations and
generations ago. But some people consider that, the two stories together,
entitled Orphans of the Skies and Owl, some people consider that book the
classic of the generation ship or slow ship stories.
Probably the turning point in Heinlein's stories was Starship Troopers, written
in 1959. The story was supposedly the last in a series of juvenile novels which
Heinlein was writing at the time, but it wasn't accepted by the publisher
because of its content, specifically the way it treated war. The story, briefly,
is about a young man, Juan Rico, who grows up and becomes part of the military
service and then serving in the military service has various adventures on other
planets. Rico learns the nature of war and its value, the need for discipline
and a philosophy of punishment which some readers found very unusual. Antisocial
behavior in the book is strictly limited and the whole society is very
regimented. One of the main points that Heinlein wants to make in the novel is
that if man had no challenge, he would tend to become complacent. Also, another
theme that you find in the story is that it's a success story which is similar
to many other of Heinlein's works. But also some readers, as you mentioned
earlier, but the publishers, I think, which gave him a little trouble with the
book, have seen it as very militaristic. Heinlein has been accused of many
things, contradictory things. It's hard to pin him down. He's been called a
fascist on the one hand, a liberal on the other, an anarchist on one hand, a
militarist on the other. The novel viewed in a rather strict sense could be
viewed as fascist, but it really isn't. Heinlein was a social Darwinist in that
he believed that the strong would prevail. Another category of Heinlein's works
that we might mention started with a novel, Rocket Ship Galileo, in 1947.
Heinlein's become rather well known for his juvenile novels, of which there are
a number. Yeah, I think there were 13 juveniles, and among the many barriers
that Heinlein broke as a science fiction writer, one of them was the juvenile
market. He was the first one to really pick up a public of juvenile readers. I
believe it was Lester Del Rey, the critic, who said that one of the greatest
factors in the spread of science fiction or the importance of it today were the
juvenile novels of Heinlein, because the whole generation was brought up reading
those books, and that generation is now the readers, the writers, the editors,
and so forth, of science fiction. So they were sort of educated on Heinlein's
juveniles. In his juvenile novels, he covered many and various themes, very good
action-adventure novel, one of them being Starman Jones about a young Ozark farm
boy who eventually becomes the captain of a star liner, Half Spacesuit Roll
Travel about a young man who wins a spacesuit in a contest and goes out and
tries it on and is immediately picked up by aliens from another world and
carried off to various adventures. Rocket Ship Galileo, which we already
mentioned, which was made into a movie, Destination Moon, and Space Cadet, which
inspired the TV series Tom Corbett Space Cadet. I think overall, we might say
that all of these juveniles, the main theme, one which would obviously appeal to
the class of readers they reamed at, is a sort of boy into man. You have an
adolescent who undergoes various adventures, it matures him, it expands him, and
he becomes a young man by the end of the book, and that appealed, of course, to
that class of reader. As you said before, the book Rocket Ship Galileo was the
inspiration for the movie Destination Moon. That was made by George Powell in
1950, working with Heinlein, by the way, and it's recognized by movie critics
and science fiction critics both as the initiator or the impetus for one of the
greatest eras of science fiction films, the 1950s. Destination Moon really
started that. It got the public interested in science fiction movies that showed
them that they could be made intelligently. In the same year, Kellogg's picked
up Heinlein's novel, Space Cadet, and made it into Tom Corbett's Space Cadet, a
15-minute program, which was seen nationwide and became extremely popular and
went on for several years, and it was a great innovator in special effects in
the field of television. And, of course, Heinlein's recent books are very
different than the ones he started off writing back in his future history days.
Some readers don't like his recent books. They are different. They're avant
-garde. They're liberal. They're controversial. They treat things like religion,
sex, and all kinds of social institutions from a very strange viewpoint. And
probably Heinlein's best-known book belongs to this category. And that, of
course, would be Stranger in a Strange Land, published in 1961. Stranger in a
Strange Land uses several themes which Heinlein has used throughout his works,
one of them being a father figure or an educator which becomes
aligned with a young man or young person and helps them over their problems with
learning about new situations and new environments or what's happening to them
as they grow up.
The protagonist of that book, Michael Valentine Smith, he's called a Martian but
he's really a human that's grown up on Mars. He's never known the Earth. His
parents had gone to Mars. The ship had not come back. They died. He'd been born
right before they died on the planet Mars. And he comes back to Earth, I think,
in his mid-twenties. And he's been raised by the Martians, the old ones, I
believe they're called. And he's got some extremely strange powers which
illustrate Heinlein's occasional interest in a sort of a Superman type, a
superhuman type, a special leader with powers and insights and wisdom that the
common people don't have. And the novel is based upon the strange powers of this
Michael Valentine Smith. The story starts off as an action-adventure story where
Michael Valentine Smith is rescued from the hospital in which he's recuperating
from the flight back to Earth. He's taken to his soon-to-be father figure, Jubal
Herschaw. And Jubal sets about in educating Michael in the ways and customs of
Earth. What Heinlein does in that book as Michael Smith becomes educated in
Earth ways, it gives Heinlein the opportunity to view Earth, its institutions,
its customs, and so forth, with the point of view of an outsider. Even though
Michael is a human being, he's a Martian. He's been raised by Martians. So his
responses to what he sees on Earth, the social institutions, the religions, and
so forth, form, I think, the center of the book. And Michael soon gathers a
group of people around him and they become his followers. And I guess he starts
what you'd call a religion based on certain things that he has learned in his
upbringing on Mars. He eventually teaches several of his followers how to also
use these particular powers that he has. And in order to use these abilities,
one has to grok, or to know and completely holistically understand certain
concepts about the universe and how it operates. This particular word, grok, was
quite popular in the 60s. became kind of a catchword for the people who had read
the novel. Yeah, that especially, the character of Smith and the word grok and
so forth sort of became the property of the so-called flower children, the
hippies of the 60s. They really picked up on the book, the idea of an outsider,
of someone who has new things to offer to society who wants change. The ideas
that Highland put across with free love and sex in the novel also had a great
deal to do with some of the changing mores in the 60s. Some people have seen a
heavily symbolic value to Smith. He is killed by Earth people who are afraid of
his movement, but he has the ability, as taught to him by the old ones on Mars,
to overcome death, sort of a resurrection, not his physical body as such, but a
new state of being. And I think that some people see that as almost a Christ
symbol. You have a leader with special powers, he gains followers, he dies, but
he's still there to inspire and inform them and teach them. He's been called the
dean of science fiction. His works span the history of science fiction from pulp
days to the present. He is still an important influence in the field, and it's
certain that science fiction would not be the same without Robert A. Heinlein.
This is David Cruz, Daryl A., and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas. The
Power & The Power & The Power & The Power & Thank you.